The management architecture:




MAC Layer Management Entity (MLME)
Physical Layer Management Entity (PLME)
System Management Entity (SME)

The SME is used by users and device drivers in order to interact with
the 802.11 network interface.

The MLME and PLME both have independent Management Information Bases
(MIB). The MIBs are used to query for status information, as well as
request actions.

The SME may alter both the PHY and the MAC MIBs through the MLME and
PLME service interfaces.

Several parameters are used in the scanning procedure.

The ones of particular interest are: 

ProbeDelay -> Delay in microseconds before before the procedure to begin
probing a different channel begins.

Min/Max ChannelTime -> Specify the minimum and maximum amount of time
to spend on each channel during active scanning.


A summary of active scanning is the following:

	For each channel in the channel list:

		Move to the channel and wait for either an indication of an
		incoming frame or for the ProbeDelay timer to expire. If an
		incoming frame is detected, the channel is in use and can be
		probed. The timer prevents an empty channel from blocking the
		entire procedure; the station won’t wait indefinitely for
		incoming frames.

		Gain access to the medium using the basic DCF access procedure
		and send a Probe Request frame.

		Wait for the minimum channel time, MinChannelTime, to elapse.

		If the medium was never busy, there is no network. Move to the
		next channel.

		If the medium was busy during the MinChannelTime interval, wait
		until the maximum time, MaxChannelTime, and process any Probe
		Response frames.


Probe responses are subject to DIFS / SIFS. And will likely impact the
timing between probe requests.


The probing sequence changes for DMG and non DMG stations. For this experiment,
we will be using non DMG stations.

The active scan starts once MLME-SCAN.request has been received with a
parameter specifying an active scan. 

When the MLME-SCAN.request is received, it is given a channel list of
channels to scan. This channel list likely contains channels from the
5GHz channel, on top of the expected 2.4GHz band. 

The probing behavior of a device also changes when it hears responses.
In the first stage of the experiment, we are looking for probing
behavior of a device in isolation. 

After the probe timer expires or the STA finds evidence of life, it
moves on to the next step (either FILS - below, or non FILS - double
below) Answering once you hear a sign of life is just to reduce the time
it takes to connect to a network.


FILS = Fast Initial Link Setup. Probing Behavior may change depending if
devices support FILS or not. Essentially, the device may skip most of
the probing behavior if within some small time window it receives either
a probe request from another nearby device that it thinks it can use to
find nearby access points OR It receives a probe
response/beacon/discovery frame that makes it confident that the AP that
sent that is a suitable candidate. The standard also says this:

"NOTE—How an SME considers a probe request or AP suitable is outside the
scope of this standard." OK.

The STA then performs the basic access procedure to the medium (not
mentioned but you know what I'm talking about, we can include it as a
link). The probe request is sent to the broadcast address, and contains
the SSID and BSSID from the scan primitive. Sometimes (depending on the
device), a request can include a list of SSIDs. Essentially the STA just
sends the request to everyone, but only wants an answer from those
contained within the SSID / BSSID list. If the device has support for
lists, then send a probe request for each SSID in the list, each to the
broadcast address. The STA needs to perform the basic access procedure
each time.

Start the activeScanningTimer, if a message is not received before
reaching MinChannelTime, then the channel is not busy and we can move on
to the next channel.

If the STA is a non FILS STA, then receive all of the probe responses
and beacon frames while the activeScanningTimer is less than
maxChannelTime. 

If the STA is a FILS STA, then while the activeScanningTimer is less
than maxChannelTime, the STA processes any beacon frames/ probe
responses / FILS Discovery regardless of who the intended receiver was.
If it finds any new BSSs, it immediately returns the result if the scan
primitive contained a reporting option of IMMEDIATE. If the reporting
option is CHANNEL_SPECIFIC, once you hit maxChannelTime, and send
messages regarding the networks you found before moving on to the next
channel to scan.

If the STA is a non FILS STA, then just process all of the probes
responses received up until maxChannelTime and build BSSDescriptions for
each probe response that match the criteria in the MLME-SCAN.request
primitive.

Set the NAV to 0, indicating that the channel is free.

Once all of the channels have been scanned, return a MLME-SCAN.confirm
with all of the results.


There are some nice diagrams in the standard to use if you want.






This brings us to important factors to consider in the experiment:

minChannelTime/maxChannelTime change how quickly we jump from one
channel to another

Whether the device supports FILS since that changes the probing behavior

How busy each channel is, since we need to gain access before moving on.

The type of scan being issued (IMMEDIATE vs CHANNEL_SPECIFIC vs etc)

Whether the STA supports sending SSID lists versus needing multiple
calls

The operating system may change how these system calls are made

USB / PCIE throughput to the network devices.

The channel list, which directly depends on whether you are scanning
2.4GHz or 5GHz. 

The operating system may send scan request primitives at different
rates, which we can observe.










